2.2.5 Gender inequality 
Regardless of the provisions of legal systems, gender inequality was and is rooted in social and religious norms on women’s rights to land, inheritance, marriage, division of labour, access to education, credit, employment and participation in social and political life. For instance, while Kenya’s Constitution outlaws gender discrimination, it also upholds gender-biased customary law on marriage, divorce and inheritance. Measurement of gender inequality is problematic due to a near-total lack of data. Household surveys focus on the household as a whole and permit computing ‘average household income or consumption per capita’, de facto ignoring interpersonal distribution. Consequently, Gini coefficients substantially underestimate the distribution of well-being among individuals. Ad hoc studies help disentangle the sources of gender inequality. Nordman and Wolff (2009) estimated wage regressions controlling for workers’ human capital, job characteristics and firm heterogeneity for seven African countries. They found no evidence of difference in male and female earnings in four of these countries once personal, job and firm characteristics were accounted for. Yet, a pure gender bias was evident in two countries. Thus, part of the gender gap is due to discrimination against women in education, type of employment and the characteristics of the firm where they work, rather than to pure gender bias. 
3.4.5 Gender dimensions of inequality
While labour market and educational system challenges contribute to inequality, gender disparities within these institutions are an important source of inequality in Africa. The UNDP's Gender Inequality Index is a composite measure that reflects inequality in achievement between men and women in three dimensions: reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market, where the lower the score, the closer the gender parity. In the global distribution of scores that are available in the data (152 countries), only three African countries score above the median – Libya, Tunisia and Mauritius. African countries are concentrated at the upper end of the distribution, with 28 out of 39 scoring in the worst quartile. The South Asian countries of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh perform better on the Gender Inequality Index than countries such as Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique, which are relatively higher-income countries. 
An important driver of gender inequality is access to education, which remains crucially important in determining individuals’ labour market outcomes. Since the late 1990s, there has been some progress in equalising access to education for girls and boys in SSA. However, this has predominantly been achieved at the primary education level (The Economist, 2013, using UN Data). Over this same time, there has been no progress on average in achieving gender parity in secondary schooling, and there has been a widening of gender inequality in tertiary educational enrolment. In most other parts of the world, there have been significant improvements in gender parity at higher levels of education. 
These differences in educational attainment are important because they predict gender gaps in employment and earnings. According to the International Labour Organisation’s 2012 Report on Global Employment Trends for Women, only 14.0 per cent of working women in Africa are in wage employment compared to 29.0 per cent of employed men (ILO, 2012b). Just under 40.0 per cent of working women are contributing family members, compared to 80.0 per cent for men. Income is associated with empowerment and decision-making power within households, where women remain disadvantaged. 
A comprehensive analysis of how gender inequality is impeding progress on human development in Africa has been conducted by UNDP (2016). Overall, gender inequality in social services (e.g. health and education services) translates to lower economic opportunities for women, in particular, and society as a whole. As the economic status of women improves, so does the economic status of entire families. In fact, gender inequality in the labour market alone costs sub-Saharan Africa about $95 billion annually between 2010 and 2014 (UNDP, 2016). 
11.4.3 Gender inequality and human development
As discussed in preceding sections, the underlying drivers of inequality in human capabilities include unequal participation in political and economic life; unequal access to economic, financial and natural resources; lack of human security and rights; and inequitable outcomes and opportunities for women and men. Inequitable distribution of national resources, differences in power to influence decision-making and existing discriminatory social institutions and norms, especially gender inequality, also act as key transmission channels for inequality in African countries.
There is a negative relationship between human development and gender inequality in Africa, as demonstrated in figure 11.11, which maps the level of human development against the level of gender inequality. Countries with overall low levels of gender inequality, such as Libya, Tunisia and Mauritius, tend to have higher levels of human development. By contrast, countries such as Niger, Chad, Central African Republic, Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with higher levels of gender inequality, also tend to have lower levels of human development. 
African countries have responded to gender inequality by putting in place legislative frameworks and institutions at regional, subregional and national levels, and targeted programmes to reduce gaps in education and health, as well as providing dedicated resources, yet this problem persists. In view of the persistent nature of gender inequality in Africa, it is useful to examine the root causes to inform a more effective response. The Africa Human Development Report 2016 (UNDP, 2016) explores the policy agenda and actions needed to accelerate gender equality and women’s empowerment in Africa. One of the key findings is that social institutions and norms play a critical role in perpetuating gender inequality. For instance, there is ample evidence that countries with high gender inequality and the presence of discriminatory social institutions, as illustrated in UNDP’s Gender Inequality Index and OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI), tend to have poorer human development outcomes for women than for men. These discriminatory social institutions limit women’s decision-making power and status in the home, increase their vulnerability to violence, lead to unequal care for children (favouring sons) and reduce women’s access to resources and participation in politics and public life. 
While these findings do not establish causality, they do indicate that tackling the root causes of gender inequality may be a useful channel toward improving the lives of both women and men. To this end, the Africa Human Development Report proposes a five-fold approach toward the achievement of sustainable human development by accelerating gender equality and the empowerment of women. This approach first shifts the focus from gender equality as a separate outcome to advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment as a critical enabler of all development outcomes. Second, it encourages strong leadership and accountability in tackling destructive social norms in all their forms and at all levels. Third, it calls for strategic choices in planning and budgeting that forgo the short-term gains of the status quo in favour of investments toward a more empowered and inclusive growth trajectory. It also calls for more adaptive, socially responsive, representative institutions and better data for effective decision-making. Finally, this approach fosters regional and South-South cooperation in the design and implementation of gender-focused policies and initiatives. 
14.3.3 Gender disparities and fertility-related issues intensify income inequalities 
Gender inequality remains a major barrier to human development, including access to health and education services and reduction in poverty and income inequality. The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures gender inequalities in three important aspects of human development: reproductive health; empowerment (parliamentary participation and secondary education); and economic participation. This index highlights gender disparities in the three countries. The higher the GII value, the greater the disparities between women and men and the greater the loss to human development (UNDP, 2015). Burkina Faso’s high GII of 0.631 shows that greater equity could be achieved if this disparity were narrowed. Reducing the current GII of Ghana (0.554) and Tanzania (0.547) is also important to accelerate progress in these countries. 
The current adolescent birth rate (per 100,000 live births) is still very high, especially in Tanzania (122.7 per 1,000 live births) and Burkina Faso (115 per 1,000 live births) compared to Ghana (58 per 1,000 live births).11 The strong positive correlation index between the Gini coefficient and adolescent birth rates for Burkina Faso (0.709) and Tanzania (0.514) suggests that the adolescent birth rate, which often keeps girls out of school, could slow progress on reducing inequality. High adolescent birth rates could have contributed to the very low percentage of the population with secondary school education, at 5.6 per cent (Tanzania) and 0.9 per cent (Burkina Faso) (see table 5 of the Gender Inequality Index of UNDP, 2015). The correlation index is also high for fertility rates (see Annexes 14.1-3).
Women have experienced a more acute lack of opportunities. In addition to experiencing discrimination in the labour, asset, services and credit markets, most women are engaged in vulnerable employment.12 In Burkina Faso, vulnerable employment rates for women and men are 93.1 per cent and 86.7 per cent, respectively, compared with 84.3 per cent and 68.9 per cent, respectively, in Ghana, and 79.7 per cent and 68.5 per cent, respectively, in Tanzania (World Bank, n.d.).
Disparities in land distribution appear to be one of the factors driving gender-based inequities. The marginalisation of women in land ownership has become an issue of particular concern in Tanzania. Although the Land Act No. 4 of 1999 establishes equal rights for men and women to access, own, control and dispose of land, land insecurity among female smallholder farmers is very high in several parts of the country (Economic Research and Social Foundation, 2013). In Burkina Faso, as well, despite clear legislation guaranteeing access to land without discrimination, traditional practices remain barriers for women to access land. Female ownership of land has improved somewhat in Ghana as a result of the implementation of the second phase of a Land Administration Project (LAP). This project may explain why poverty incidence is lower, at 19.1 per cent compared with 25.9 per cent for men in 2012-13. However, there is evidence that access to ownership and control of agricultural land is still one of the biggest challenges for female farmers. This also has a negative impact on their access to credit and other resources. 
